Okay, so now that we've seen
how hashtables work,
let's look at what's available in the JDK.
Now, the primary interface for hashtables is Map.
And as we can see K is the type of keys
maintained by this map, and V is the type of map value,
so it's a key value pair. And the Map interface
is an object that maps keys to values.
Now it says here a map cannot contain duplicate keys,
each key can map, at most, to one value.
Now, what this means is, it doesn't mean that there cannot
be collisions. It's not talking about the hashed values.
In our case, if we were to add
an employee with the key 'Smith', and then
we added another employee and we also used the key 'Smith',
the first employee that we added would be replaced
by the second employee. And so there's only ever
one employee in the table that can be associated
with the key 'Smith'. And that makes sense, right?
Because otherwise, if we come in and we provide
the key 'Smith', there would be no way of knowing
which employee we want. Now, we didn't handle that
in our implementations of Hashtable.
But our implementations, the two that we did for
linear probing and chaining in the simple one,
they're not robust implementations. I mean, if you
were going to use those hashtables in
a real-world application, then we would have a lot more
work to do. I mean, we're not handling resizing
or anything like that. That's what this means here,
it just means that we can't use the same key
to add more than one value, because otherwise
on retrieval there's no way to know which value we want.
Okay, so let's go to the HashMap class,
that implements Map. And this a concrete class,
so this is what you'd actually use.
And it says, of course, it's based on an implementation
of the Map interface. This implementation permits
null values in the null key. It says that it provides
constant time performance for the basic operations.
Now, as you read on you'll see, of course,
that if it has to resize the array, and do re-hashing,
then you're not gonna get constant time.
But there's a good discussion in here about
the initial capacity and the load factor.
You can set the load factor that you want,
and that means that when that load factor is exceeded,
the hashtable is resized,
the default is '.75'.
The implementation is not synchronised,
so if you wanna use it for multiple threads,
they suggest that you wrap it,
using the Collections.sycronizedMap method.
So let's go back to Intellij and use a HashMap.
Okay, so here we are back in Intellij.
I've added the usual four employees, and our employee class.
And let's go ahead and create a HashMap.
So we'll say 'Map',
and our key is a string and our value
will be an employee. No need for us to worry about
stored employee and everything, we're not the ones
writing the HashMap now. Because, of course, you most likely
would not implement your own hashtable in Java,
you would use one of the classes in the JDK.
So, somebody else has already written the hashtable
for us, and has taken care of collisions.
So I'll say 'hashMap', and let me just bring in
the import here,
equals...
'new'...
'HashMap' and...
you want a string and an employee.
So I'll say 'hashMap.put'
and we'll use 'Jones' as the key and Jane Jones.
'hashMap.put'...
'Doe'...
'john Doe'. And
'hashMap.put'...
'Smith'...
'mary Smith'.
And let's print out our hashtable now, or our HashMap
which is essentially a hashtable.
We can do it one of two ways, actually there's probably
several ways we can do it, but I'll show you two.
So the first one is to use an Iterator.
So we'll say 'Iterator', and we're gonna just print out
the employees. So we'll say 'Iterator' 'Employee' 'iterator'
equals...
'hashMap.'
And...
I just wanna print out the employees and so
I'm gonna call the values method here,
this gives us the values in the HashMap
and I want the Iterator for the values. And then we'll say
'while' 'iterator.hasNext'...
'System.out.println'...
'iterator.next'
So let's go ahead and run this.
And we'll see that we have our three employees
and it's important to note that they're not in the order
we added them, right? We added Jane, John and Mary
and we're getting Jane, Mary and John
because where they're placed in the hashtable
is gonna depend on the hashed value of the keys.
Okay, so now let's take a look at the other way
we could do this. I'm gonna comment this out.
And this will only be available in Java 8 and beyond.
We can use the 'for each' method, and a lamda expression.
So I'll say 'hashMap.forEach'...
then I'm gonna say 'K V'...
and we're gonna say 'System.out.println'
and in this case I'm printing the key and the value.
So 'K' will be the key, and 'V' will be the value.
And so, I'll say
'Key' equals...
plus 'K'...
plus
'Employee'
equals
plus 'V'.
And so let's go ahead and run that.
And we get for key 'Jones' we we have Jane Jones,
for key 'Smith' we have Mary Smith
and for key 'Doe' we have John Doe.
There's a contains key and a containsValue method
to see if a Map contains a key or a value.
So we could say...
'System.out.println'...
'hashMap.containsKey'...
and we can say do you contain the key 'Doe' and
'System.out.println'...
'hashMap.containsValue'
and we could say do you contain the value 'Jane Jones'.
Now we expect that this method will be faster
than this method, because in this one
we're passing the key. And so under the covers,
the key will be hashed and the method will be able to jump
right to that place in the underlying implementation
and check for 'Doe'. For this method,
when we're just passing the object,
it can't do that, there's no value to have
so it's gonna have to start at the front of the hashtable
and search for Jane Jones. And so it's always better
to have the key. So let's run.
And we get true for both, which is what we expect.
Now as I said earlier in the video, if we tried to put
an employee into the map,
using a key that we've already used,
then the employee we're adding
will replace the existing employee
that we added with that key. So for example, if we now try
to put another employee with the key 'Doe',
whatever employee we add will replace John Doe.
So let's do that. Let's say 'hashMap.put' 'Doe'
and let's put 'mike Wilson'
using the key 'Doe'
and what we expect to happen is Mike Wilson will replace
John Doe. And in fact, the put method returns the employee
that used to be there. So let's say
'employee employee' equals and this will return John Doe.
Because it's gonna replace John Doe with Mike Wilson,
because you can only have one employee per key,
and it will return John Doe. I'm gonna comment
these two lines out and let's print out the employee
we get back. So we'll say 'System.out.println'...
'employee'.
And let's run again, and we'll see what we get back
from here, and we'll see what's in our hashtable.
So we got John Doe back, as we expected.
Because he's gonna be replaced by Mike,
and now Mike is in the hashtable rather than John Doe.
Now you might not want that to happen. If you use a key
that's already been used, you don't want
the put to go ahead. And if that's the case,
you can use the putIfAbsent method.
The putIfAbsent method will only insert
Mike if the key 'Doe' has not been used.
So I'm going to comment that out, so you'll see it
and then we'll say
'hashMap.putIfAbsent'...
and we'll say 'Doe'
and 'mikeWilson'.
And I'll comment that out as well.
And let's run now and see what our hashtable looks like.
And you'll see this time, John is still in the hashtable
because this is only going to go ahead with the put
if the key 'Doe' has not already been used.
Now if we call putIfAbsent and it turns out that
Doe was used before, we'll get back the employee
that's currently stored here. So if we say
'Employee'...
'employee' equals putIfAbsent,
and let me un-comment this again.
We expect John Doe to be returned.
So this will tell the caller, hey you tried to put in
an employee for a key that's already been used
and this is the employee that's used that key.
And so let's run, and we'll see that we get John Doe back
for the putIfAbsent call. Now, let's take a look at get.
We've looked at put, let's look at get.
So, let's do a simple get. We'll just say
'System.out.println'...
'hashMap.get'...
'Smith'....
And we expect Mary back...
And there she is, so we got Mary back for Smith.
Now let's say you do a get, and there's
nothing in the table. So let's see what we get back.
So we'll just say 'get' 'someone'.
We know there's nobody in there. And you'll see
that we get back null. Now you might not want that,
and so there's a getOrDefault method that lets you
specify a default value.
And if there isn't an employee in the table,
for the key that we've used, instead the method will
return the default value. And so in that case,
you just say 'getOrDefault' and we give the key
and then we can say "well you know what, if that's null,
return Mike. We want Mike back."
And now if we run, we should see Mike Wilson. And we do.
So that will just stop the method from returning null.
Now of course we can remove employee.
So we can say
'System.out.println'
'hashMap'...
'.remove' and let's remove Jane Jones.
And so this should return the employee that we removed.
And it does and we'll see now that when we print out
the HashMap, we only have Mary and John.
So there are more methods in the HashMap class,
but I just wanted to give you a taste of what you can do.
As you can see, there's a lot more
in terms of puts and gets. Let's go back to
the HashMap Javadoc.
And so if we look down at the methods that are available,
we'll see that you have get, getOrDefault, put, putALL,
putIfAbsent, so you can put more than one thing
into the map at a time. Here's the removes.
You can give the key, there's a remove version where
you pass a key and a value and you'll only actually
remove the value from the hashtable if it used that key.
You've got replace, so you can actually replace
the value for a key. And so I'll let you
explore these on your own.
As you can see, one of the Subclasses of HashMap
is LinkedHashMap. And so if you take a look at that.
So it says that this is a hashtable
and linked list implementation of the Map Interface.
Now this does not mean that this implementation
is backed by a linked list, because it says
it's a hashtable and a linked list
and also we know that it's a Subclass of HashMap.
And HashMap is a array implementation.
If we go back to HashMap, there's a big discussion
in here about load factor and resizing and stuff.
And I haven't looked at the code, but I can tell
that it's an array implementation.
So if we go back to LinkedHashMap,
it's a hashtable and it's a linked list implementation.
Now, later on here, they give more details.
This implementation differs from HashMap
in that it maintains a doubly-linked list
running through all of its entries.
And it says this linked list defines the iteration ordering,
which is normally the order in which keys
were inserted into the map. So what this means is,
it's still being backed by an array,
but they also have put all of the entries
into a linked list. Once again, the implementation is
not synchronised, and you can use
the same Collections.sychronizedmap method
to wrap this implementation to get a synchronised map.
Now, most of the methods will be the same,
because, this implements the Map interface.
But there is a removeEldestEntry method,
and using this method you can specify
that you want the map to delete its oldest entry
every time you add a new one. And you might be asking:
"Well why the heck would you wanna do this?".
Well it's possible that you're using
the Map instance as a cache. And so if that was the case,
you wouldn't want the map to just keep
growing and growing and growing, right?
Because for a cache, basically it's for faster access
of things that have been used recently,
and so that's why you'd want to remove
the eldest, or the oldest entry.
The one that's been in the list the longest.
So if you decide that you're gonna use this class
to implement a cache and you only ever wanna keep,
let's say a hundred items, then if it's full,
and you come along and wanna add another item,
you're gonna take out the oldest item and add the new item.
Because a cache is there to provide quick access
to recently used items, the oldest item
is gonna be the most stale item.
And so that's the one that you're gonna kick out.
And so that's the LinkedHashMap class.
Now, we also have the hashtable class,
I'm gonna change this to Hashtable and see if that works.
And it does. So we have the hashtable class.
And this differs from HashMap in a couple of ways.
First of all, you can't add
null key or values. We saw that
the HashMap allows the null key
and null values, well this one doesn't.
So if you're using a hashtable,
everything's got to be non-null.
The second difference is this is synchronised.
If you don't need synchronisation,
you don't want to be using Hashtable.
This is the same situation as it was
with every list and vector, where array list
is not synchronised and vector is.
As we discussed then, synchronisation comes with
an overhead, and so if you don't need synchronisation,
then don't use Hashtable. If you don't want
to use Hashtable, let's say this is an older implementation
as well. So let's say you wanna use HashMap
but you want it synchronised, you can wrap it
in the way that we saw. But also if we come back to HashMap
or Map, go all the way up, we'll see
that there's a ConcurrentHashMap here.
And that's in the Concurrent Package,
and this is a synchronised implementation.
It says it supports full concurrency of retrievals
and high expected concurrency for updates.
And so if you really wanted concurrency,
and you were gonna deal with a lot of items,
this would be a good class to use.
Okay, so if we go back to Map, we can see
that there's a lot of classes that implement
the interface. They're usually used under
specific circumstances, the ones that we haven't looked at.
So I'll leave it up to you to explore them.
But there's a lot of support for hashtables in the JDK,
so if you're working on an application
and you're thinking that "Oh, you know what, I need
a hashtable, a hashtable would work really well here."
Then, take a look at what your requirements are
and take a look at the classes that implement
the Map interface to see which one
is gonna best suit your needs.
Alright, that's it for now. I'll see you in the next video.